Add How-to Refresh Certificates (#631)
canonical/k8s-snap: docs/src/snap/howto/refresh-certs.md

# Refreshing Kubernetes Certificates

Keeping your {{product}} cluster secure and functional requires
regularly refreshing its certificates. Certificates in Kubernetes ensure
secure communication between the various components of the cluster. If
these certificates expire, it can lead to communication failures, disrupted
services, and potential security risks. This how-to will walk you through
the steps to refresh the certificates for both control plane and worker
nodes in your {{product}} cluster.

## What you will need

- A running {{product}} cluster

```{note} To refresh the certificates in your cluster, make sure it was

> initially set up with self-signed certificates during the bootstrap process.

Author: I think this will only add complexity to the guide. Without using `openssl` tricks, it would be difficult to determine if the certificates are self signed or not. The administrator should already know if the cluster was setup with custom CA, as they should have provided custom certs during the bootstrap and join phases.

> initially set up with self-signed certificates during the bootstrap process.

Reviewer: That makes sense, thanks Mateo!

on each control plane node in your cluster:

1. Access each control plane node in your cluster.
2. Run the `refresh-certs` command:

```
sudo k8s refresh-certs --expires-in 1y --extra-sans mynode.local
```

This command refreshes the certificates for the control plane node, adding an
extra Subject Alternative Name (SAN) to the certificate. The `--expires-in`
flag sets the certificate's validity duration, which can be specified in years,
months, days, or any unit accepted by the [ParseDuration][] function in Go.

```{note} Ensure that you provide the same SANs that were used when the cluster
was bootstrapped. If you don't, the control plane may fail to communicate with
other nodes in the cluster.
```

3. The cluster will automatically update the certificates in the control plane
node and restart the necessary services. The command output will show the new
expiration date:

```
Certificates have been successfully refreshed, and will expire at 2025-08-27 21:00:00 +0000 UTC.
```

### Refreshing Worker Node Certificates

To refresh the certificates on worker nodes, perform the following steps on
each worker node in your cluster:

1. Access each worker node in your cluster.

> 2. Run the `refresh-certs` command:

Author: The text already indicates that the steps should be run on each worker node. Would you like me to improve the wording or restructure the paragraph?

> 2. Run the `refresh-certs` command:

Reviewer: Your sentences are good but we can consolidate them into the first one to avoid duplicating information.

```
sudo k8s refresh-certs --expires-in 10y --timeout 10m
```

This command refreshes the certificates for the worker node. The `--expires-in`
flag specifies the certificate's validity period. As mentioned in the control
plane section, this duration can be set using any unit accepted by the
[ParseDuration][] function in Go, in addition to years, months, or days.

> 3. During this process, multiple Certificate Signing Requests (CSRs) are
> created. The command output will guide you on how to approve the CSRs on any
> control plane node in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. During the certificate refresh, multiple Certificate Signing Requests (CSRs) are
created. Follow the instructions in the command output to approve the CSRs on any
control plane node in the cluster.
```

```
sudo k8s refresh-certs --expires-in 10y --timeout 10s
The following CertificateSigningRequests should be approved. Run the following commands on any of the control plane nodes of the cluster:
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-serving
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-client
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kube-proxy-client
Waiting for certificates to be created...
```

> 4. On any control plane node, run the commands provided in the output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Approve the CSRs by running the commands from the previous output on any control plane node:
```

```
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-serving
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-client
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kube-proxy-client
certificatesigningrequest.certificates.k8s.io/k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-serving approved
certificatesigningrequest.certificates.k8s.io/k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-client approved
certificatesigningrequest.certificates.k8s.io/k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kube-proxy-client approved
```

This command approves the CSRs, allowing the certificates to be created.

> 5. After approving all the requested CSRs, the worker node will automatically
> refresh its the certificates and restart the necessary services. You should see
> a confirmation message similar to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. After approving all the requested CSRs, the worker node will automatically
refresh its certificates and restart the necessary services:
```

# Refreshing Kubernetes Certificates

To keep your {{product}} cluster secure and functional, it is essential
to regularly refresh its certificates. Certificates in Kubernetes ensure
secure communication between the various components of the cluster. Expired
certificates lead to communication failures, disrupted services, and potential
security risks. This how-to will walk you through
the steps to refresh the certificates for both control plane and worker
nodes in your {{product}} cluster.

## Prerequisites

- A running {{product}} cluster

```{note} To refresh the certificates in your cluster, make sure it was
initially set up with self-signed certificates during the bootstrap process.
```

> ### Refreshing Control Plane Node Certificates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Refresh Control Plane Node Certificates
```

To refresh the certificates on control plane nodes, perform the following steps
on each control plane node in your cluster:

> 1. Access each control plane node in your cluster.
> 2. Run the `refresh-certs` command:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
We can remove these steps now that we've said this in the sentence above.

```
sudo k8s refresh-certs --expires-in 1y --extra-sans mynode.local
```

This command refreshes the certificates for the control plane node, adding an

> extra [Subject Alternative Name][] (SAN) to the certificate. Checking the
> current SANs on your node can be done by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extra [Subject Alternative Name][] (SAN) to the certificate. Check the
current SANs on your node by running the following command:
```

```
openssl x509 -in /etc/kubernetes/pki/apiserver.crt -noout -text | grep -A 1 "Subject Alternative Name"
```

```{note} If your node setup includes additional SANs, be sure to provide the
specific SANs for each node as needed using the `--extra-sans` flag. While this

> isn't required, omitting them could impact your node's ability to communicate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is not required, omitting them could impact your node's ability to communicate
```

with other components in the cluster.
```

> The `--expires-in`flag sets the certificate's validity duration, which can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `--expires-in` flag sets the certificate's validity duration, which can
```

> be specified in years, months, days, or any unit accepted by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be specified in years, months, days, or any other unit accepted by the
```

[ParseDuration][] function in Go.

3. The cluster will automatically update the certificates in the control plane
node and restart the necessary services. The new expiration date will be
displayed in the command output:

```
Certificates have been successfully refreshed, and will expire at 2025-08-27 21:00:00 +0000 UTC.
```

> ### Refreshing Worker Node Certificates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Refresh Worker Node Certificates
```

To refresh the certificates on worker nodes, perform the following steps on
each worker node in your cluster:

> 
> 1. Access each worker node in your cluster.
> 
> 2. Run the `refresh-certs` command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```
sudo k8s refresh-certs --expires-in 10y --timeout 10m
```

This command refreshes the certificates for the worker node. The `--expires-in`
flag specifies the certificate's validity period, which can be set using any
units accepted by the [ParseDuration][] function in Go, such as years, months,
or days.

3. During the certificate refresh, multiple Certificate Signing Requests (CSRs)
are created. Follow the instructions in the command output to approve the CSRs
on any control plane node in the cluster.

```
sudo k8s refresh-certs --expires-in 10y --timeout 10s
The following CertificateSigningRequests should be approved. Run the following commands on any of the control plane nodes of the cluster:
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-serving
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-client
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kube-proxy-client
Waiting for certificates to be created...
```

> 4. Approve the CSRs by running the commands from the previous output on any
> control plane node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Approve the CSRs by running the following commands on any control plane node, which allows the certificates to be created:
```

```
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-serving
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-client
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kube-proxy-client
certificatesigningrequest.certificates.k8s.io/k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-serving approved
certificatesigningrequest.certificates.k8s.io/k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-client approved
certificatesigningrequest.certificates.k8s.io/k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kube-proxy-client approved
```

> 
> This command approves the CSRs, allowing the certificates to be created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Moving this bit into the sentence above the command.

# Refreshing Kubernetes Certificates

Keeping your {{product}} cluster secure and functional requires
regularly refreshing its certificates. Certificates in Kubernetes ensure
secure communication between the various components of the cluster. If
these certificates expire, it can lead to communication failures, disrupted
services, and potential security risks. This how-to will walk you through
the steps to refresh the certificates for both control plane and worker
nodes in your {{product}} cluster.

## What you will need
- A running {{product}} cluster

```{note} To refresh the certificates in your cluster, make sure it was
initially set up with self-signed certificates or with your own CA certificates

> and keys during the bootstrap process.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we currently can rotate certificates that are signed by external CA, can we? 
In the proposal, this was out of scope: https://github.com/canonical/k8s-snap/blob/main/docs/proposals/002-refresh-certificates.md#external-ca-certificate

Author: Technically, we can. In the bootstrap configuration, you can provide all the [certificates](https://github.com/canonical/k8s-snap-api/blob/main/api/v1/type_bootstrap_config.go#L27-L32) for the cluster, including the CA cert and CA key, which allow the cluster to manage its own certificates. This is possible if the user provides all the necessary custom certificates. However, if it causes more confusion, I’ll remove that part and leave only the self-signed note.

Reviewer 2: True, I was messing that up with CA rotation. It's fine to keep it

```

### Refreshing Control Plane Node Certificates
To refresh the certificates on control plane nodes, follow these steps:

> 1. Access each control plane node in your cluster.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add the following on top instead:
`Perform the following steps on each control-plane node of the cluster.`

2. Run the `refresh-certs` command:

```bash
sudo k8s refresh-certs --expires-in 1y --extra-sans mynode.local
```

This command refreshes the certificates for the control plane node, adding an
extra Subject Alternative Name (SAN) to the certificate. The `--expires-in`
flag sets the certificate's validity duration, which can be specified in years,
months, days, or any unit accepted by the [ParseDuration][] function in Go.

```{note} Ensure that you provide the same SANs that were used when the cluster
was bootstrapped. If you don't, the control plane may fail to communicate with

> other nodes in the cluster.

Reviewer 2: I'm curious. Why does the user need to provide the extra-sans if they are the same as the bootstrap sans?

Author: We are not storing the bootstrap SANs, as these are node-specific. The user might want to change the extra SANs when refreshing the certificates, and for orchestration layers (CAPI or Juju), they already know about the cluster-wide extra SANs we want to add.

Reviewer 2: In the comment you write `The user might want to change the extra SANs when refreshing the certificates` but the text says: `Ensure that you provide the same SANs that were used when the cluster was bootstrapped.` Maybe at an "Ensure that you provide at least..."

Author: @louiseschmidtgen It's possible to check the current SANs. Let's add a snippet to check this!
@bschimke95 Your are absolutely right, let me rephrase that to convey that the user should include the host specific SANs.

```
3. The cluster will automatically update the certificates in the control plane
node and restart the necessary services. The command output will show the new
expiration date:
```bash
Certificates have been successfully refreshed, and will expire at 2025-08-27 21:00:00 +0000 UTC.
```

### Refreshing Worker Node Certificates

To refresh the certificates on worker nodes, follow these steps:

1. Access each worker node in your cluster.

2. Run the `refresh-certs` command:
```bash
sudo k8s refresh-certs --expires-in 10y --timeout 10m
```
This command refreshes the certificates for the worker node. The `--expires-in`
flag specifies the certificate's validity period. As mentioned in the control
plane section, this duration can be set using any unit accepted by the
[ParseDuration][] function in Go, in addition to years, months, or days.

3. During this process, multiple Certificate Signing Requests (CSRs) are created.
The command output will guide you on how to approve the CSRs on any control plane
node in the cluster.

> ```bash

Reviewer 3: using `bash` looks like the right thing to do here, but I noticed some weird coloring in the generated docs. like highlighting the `for` and some numbers in other blocks.

Reviewer 2: According to Nick, you may just remove this and ReadTheDocs will fall-back to something sane.

Author: Sounds good, let me update the code block.

> root@w-1:~# k8s refresh-certs --expires-in 10y --timeout 10s

Reviewer 2: nit: commands and output should always be separated so that users can easily copy the commands. For the same reason, I'd remove the `root@w-1:#` prefix

Author: Sure, sounds good

k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kube-proxy-client
Waiting for certificates to be created...
```

4. On any control plane node, run the commands provided in the output:
```bash
root@t-1:~# k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-serving
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-client
k8s kubectl certificate approve k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kube-proxy-client
certificatesigningrequest.certificates.k8s.io/k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-serving approved
certificatesigningrequest.certificates.k8s.io/k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kubelet-client approved
certificatesigningrequest.certificates.k8s.io/k8sd-3974895791729870959-worker-kube-proxy-client approved
```
This command approves the CSRs, allowing the certificates to be created.

5. After approving all the requested CSRs, the worker node will automatically
refresh its the certificates and restart the necessary services. You should see
a confirmation message similar to the following:
```bash
Certificates have been successfully refreshed, and will expire at 2034-08-27 21:00:00 +0000 UTC.
```

> ## Summing Up

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need this section

Author: Cool, let's remove it. I noticed a couple of Summing Up sections in other how-tos, so I wanted to swim with the current 😄

Reviewer 2: Up to you. IMHO this sounded too much like a summary that an AI would generate at the end of a prompt response, hence I wouldn't add it here. (In the end, our docs are hand-crafted with sweat and tears :D )
